Vietnam, Homage to the Buddha Shakyamuni.
Respectfully, dear fellow practitioners, filial piety
is the aspiration of a Buddhist disciple to
practice
filial piety towards their parents. However, if
we don't understand it clearly, we may
sometimes not be practicing
filial piety, but rather harming
ourselves. Consider your parents in the context of
worldly practice;
each person
's circumstances must be clearly understood so that
they can practice filial piety
correctly. I have a question
sent to you, also related to
filial piety, but it concerns
borrowing money to please
parents. I would like to read the question: Respectfully,
I have lived and worked
diligently and earned
a lot of money, but I am always in debt. Upon
checking, I find that a
large portion of my money goes to my parents, and the
average amount I spend on
travel and shopping. My heart
aches because no matter how
much money I earn, I choose to support and care
for my parents.  But my parents are always afraid
I'll spend money recklessly, so they keep telling me to
buy this and that even though they
could afford it. Because I want to please them, I've
often borrowed money to
buy things for them. If I say I don't have
money, they think I've
given all the money to my boyfriend. Please, teacher,
help me untangle this knot in my heart. I am deeply
grateful for your kindness. (Sigh) Dear
friends,
when we have a fund to discuss borrowing money, we should consider the issue of borrowing.
Because borrowing money means we have to repay it. We
can't not repay it.
No matter the circumstances,
we have to repay. So we must
orient our thinking.
When should we borrow money and in
what circumstances shouldn't we borrow money? We must orient ourselves in
that. Today, Yen
will explain this part a little bit. That is,
don't borrow money to eat.
After we can only buy rice to eat,
we don't borrow money to buy food and eat. Don't borrow
money to go out and have fun. If you have money, you can
go out and have fun; if you don't, you ca
n't.  It's
okay to borrow money to buy
gifts for others, but why
not borrow money to buy gifts for others
?
Because deep down,
I'll be angry with the person I give the
gift to. Yes,
that's not being sincere about giving the
gift.
I'm lending money to someone, but
deep down, I have to repay the
debt. Whenever I think that
I have to buy a gift for this person, it will
create resentment for me in many future
lives. We must understand
how the stream of consciousness flows
through many lifetimes.
Our consciousness, if it
keeps harboring resentment, will flow
through many lifetimes, and when we meet again, we will cause
suffering to each other.
And we shouldn't give money to
others when we do
n't have the ability to repay them,
because that also creates resentment. The
next time we meet them, it
will become an enemy. We
must think deeply about the cause of
suffering in future lives; it's because of the
way our minds calculate and gratify things.
I'm causing people suffering. People say they're causing me
suffering, but I have to think about the Four Noble Truths
to avoid causing
harm to myself and others in
the future, especially while I'm
working in this modern environment.
Okay, so let's consider your specific situation.
You earn a lot of money,
but you give it to your parents.
But another average part of it is
spent on travel and shopping for
everyone. Then there's the issue of travel and
shopping for everyone. Another issue
is that
your parents are afraid you'll spend
money recklessly, so they
buy things for you to save
money so you can
travel and avoid wasteful spending. Buying things for everyone is
unnecessary. People
need things that make them
look good and build trust in
you. That's why you need direction
in your work. For example, I will
go to work, I will do my job, and
I will use my money for what...  Currently,
what have I accomplished? That is,
we need to have a solid foundation
in life first. Then, your parents
will naturally trust you as a
mature, thoughtful, and thrifty person who knows how to
manage things. If
your parents think like that, they won't worry about you
spending recklessly or demanding
money from you. That's in
this specific case.
Remember, in
this particular situation, it's very easy to
resolve.
You should only travel moderately and make
sure you have some money
saved up for that trip. For
example, talk to your parents and say that
you plan to buy a motorbike soon and
are saving up for it.
Your parents will see that you have money
saved, that you are a responsible and calculating person,
and they won't worry anymore. Your father
won't force you to buy it for them
either. The issue is that you borrow
money to please your parents;
that's because your parents don't...  Don't worry. You have to be honest. That's
why your parents keep
asking you to borrow money to buy things for them.
Ms. Khuyen advises against
borrowing money to buy things for your parents and suggests you reconsider
your spending habits. To be
honest, when
borrowing money for your parents, you
should consider the
following situations: firstly, if your parents are sick,
you should borrow money to pay for their treatment. It's
wrong not to
borrow money for their medical expenses. Secondly, sometimes you're
doing well financially, and sometimes you're not.
If you're just borrowing money for
something unnecessary for your parents, you should be truthful. For example,
if you're buying some gifts that aren't really
necessary, you should tell them the
truth: "I've run out of
money. My
sister has already given you the money for this. Now I'm
out of money, so I can't buy
the things you're asking for anymore." Honestly,
you have to be truthful with your parents.
My parents are the people
I can be most honest with, and if I don't
speak to them, how can I live
honestly with anyone else? So
you should adjust your spending habits
to reassure your parents and don't
borrow money to buy gifts for them just to please them.
Don't try to please
your parents by borrowing money to buy things for them.
Borrowing money to buy gifts for parents is a common situation,
especially for daughters-in-law who often face
difficult family circumstances, having to care for their husbands, children, and the family,
yet
sometimes having to borrow money to buy
gifts for their parents-in-law.
So, if you're in
that situation just to please your parents-in-law,
you can save on
your expenses and
buy something that matches
your financial situation. You
shouldn't borrow
money to buy gifts for your parents-in-law. I
also have a story like
this: a friend...  In Hanoi,
you guys go to work, but you say
your job is
business, and then when you start doing
business, it's not doing
well anymore. Before, when you were
doing very well, you
bought all designer goods, and then when you came home, you had to
buy everything for your family.
The news is that at first,
everyone thought you were like that, and
when difficulties arose, they didn't dare ask
for loans. You just kept going,
maintaining that spending level.
You had to live with your in-laws, still had to
eat delicious food,
still had to
buy designer goods, still had to buy expensive things.
And then it all came crashing down to 5
billion pounds because you had to borrow
money to buy everything. In the end, you could
n't borrow money, you had to borrow at high
interest rates. It kept piling up until the
final truth came out. Then you knew Tiến
and found his phone number on Facebook.  I tried
calling and texting Yen, but it didn't work. I have
to tell the truth now; I ca
n't hide it anymore. It means I'm
suffering so much I want to commit suicide. Yen
advised me against it. She said, "You should tell
them your weakness: when your business was
n't doing well, you were too proud to
tell them.
You kept borrowing money from various
places, and now the interest has piled up. You've taken on so many debts,
and the
initial debt wasn't
that much. You borrowed for years, and now you have nowhere left to
borrow from to pay it back.
Thinking about death is what really hurts.
Just tell them the truth.
People might get angry,
but they'll only be angry at your foolishness and pride,
not at you spending your money on frivolous things. The
important thing is, don't live with
too much hypocrisy, because your reputation
is the thing that can kill you the most.
You have to live with integrity."  It's
absolutely true that if something isn't there, then say it isn't there,
even if it's the truth to your own family. You
must also live truthfully with
outsiders. There are cases where people
live truthfully with their family but
not with outsiders. They might spend
their money on eating and having fun, showing off
to friends,
but when they get home, they tell the truth. But no one is
that crazy. If you're going to be
truthful, then be truthful.
You should show your true wealth to your
friends, that's all. Many people
fall into this trap of showing off to friends,
not just a few.
In this case, I still advise against
borrowing money to please
your parents, or to please
your friends, and especially not to borrow
money at all. In short, don't borrow money for the sake of your reputation. Don't borrow money for
anything you do
for the sake of your reputation. Only
in cases where it's absolutely
necessary, like helping
someone with full moral integrity,
should you borrow money.
Listen, my friends, and let's all be mindful of this.  Experience
in this matter,
especially with young people, is about going out to eat and have fun
together. It's always one person
asking for money, another asking for it, and so on. It's always the same with relatives and friends.
They invite you to
their house, and you have to go out to eat.
Even now, you have to
borrow money to maintain your dignity
and avoid losing your
reputation.
Borrowing money is about maintaining
your honor, but you shouldn't open your heart to borrowing. Borrow
with sincerity and honesty. That's the best way to be honest and straightforward.
It's easier to avoid borrowing because pride can lead to
ruin and suffering.
Don't borrow money in
situations where your reputation is at
stake. Live honestly, that
's the best way. I hope you'll learn to
think critically, adjust
your spending to balance it with
your work, and become a
truly filial child, someone
your parents will appreciate.  I feel that as a
mature person, I must do this and
help my parents when necessary,
bringing them happiness and peace,
instead of borrowing money to buy gifts.
My parents often buy things I
don't need, just to please them. They
say, "That's it,
this kid has money, he bought me
a lot." My parents are like this too. They think I'm rich,
so
sometimes they like to buy things to show off, saying, "My
son bought this for me." If parents are only concerned with their own pride, then that's
fine. If we have money,
we should make our parents
proud because we bought it for
them, so they can be proud of us. Don't
borrow money to buy things for your parents just to show
off today, tomorrow, or the year after,
or even next year or the year after that. Then your mother will
be ridiculed for her son's bankruptcy,
and the whole neighborhood will laugh at her. That's
very sad. I think it's a long story.
So, anything that
serves the purpose of prestige... If I'm legitimately a businessman...  If
something isn't legitimate,
then I'll just stop. If it's just to buy fame, then I'll stop. But if
I truly have money, I
have to take care of my parents. Because of that, I can give them something to be
proud of.
Okay, then I'll go ahead and do it. Now, I wish all of you, my fellow
practitioners, continued progress. Namo
Buddha Shakyamuni. (Symbol of the Buddha Shakyamuni)